README.md, before:

# Bare metal blink on STM32 blue pill, VSCode and Dockerized

&nbsp;
## Prerequisites
- STM32F103 dev board (blue pill), and a ST-LINK V2 usb programmer. ST-LINK V2 can be a cheap clone from Amazon or ebay ($ 3). Make sure the ST-LINK driver is installed, open device manager to check. Flashing over a serial link is also possible, but not recommended because there is no debugging over a serial link.
- Assuming Windows 10 with Docker desktop installed and WSL2 enabled. A Mac or Linux machine will work also, but this repo focusses on Windows 10 host. As WSL2 distro, Debian is used.
- VSCode is used as IDE, with tasks configured in .vscode/tasks.json. 
If you want keybindings, install them as a user setting (File->Preferences->Keyboard shortcuts select json file)

&nbsp;
## Checking the dev environment
To check the arm dev environment, open a terminal into the ```.devcontainer``` folder. Rebuild the arm dev environment with:  
 ```docker build -t armdev . ```   
and run it in the background by:   
```docker run -it -d --privileged armdev```  
Check if container is running by ```docker ps```, and terminal into it by using the container id:   
```docker exec -it <id> bash```

&nbsp;
## USB in WSL and Docker
We need to flash devices from the docker container, but USB on the windows machine is not passed to WSL2 or docker containers. Also Windows hyper V does not support this. Virtualbox and VMWare player claim to forward USB devices, but I found this very cumbersome and tedious.

&nbsp;
### Preparations and installing 

&nbsp;
#### Windows
- install WSL2 with your favorite distro, in this document I will use Debian.
- install ```usbipd``` from [github](https://github.com/dorssel/usbipd-win/releases/tag/v1.3.0), this is the deamon that manages sharing on the windows side.
- Prepare a usb device for sharing from windows host. Use ```usbipd list``` to view usb sharing. After disconnecting/connecting a usb device, its state is persisted, in contrast to what the docs say. For binding/unbinding usb devices, you a elevated prompt on Windows host. Binding example:   
```usbipd bind -b 2-2```
- There is a shortcut to share a device to WSL2, so you do not have to mess around with hostnames and networks: ```usbipd wsl attach --busid=<BUSID>```. This works as long as a WSL2 session is active. ```lsusb``` on WSL2 side should now show the USB device. After removing/inserting the device, it should be attached again.

&nbsp;
#### WSL 2
- Make sure that the WSL 2 kernel is version > 5.10.60.1 To check open WSL2 terminal and ```uname -a``` If the version is lower, run from elevated prompt on Windows: ```wsl --update```
- install usbip hwdata usbutils on WSL2, if you want to use USB in WSL2. Optional stlink-tools if you want to flash STM32 devices from WSL2.   
```sudo apt install usbip hwdata usbutils stlink-tools```
- WSL comes with its own mDNS, so the Windows host can be reached as ```ping "$(hostname).local"``` There is a firewall in place, so ping does not work, but the name resolves!
- To see a list of shared devices: ```usbip list --remote="$(hostname).local"``` The resolved ip will also work, of course.
- ```sudo usbip attach --remote="$(hostname).local" --busid=<id>``` will attach a device, ```lsusb``` should now show it.   
In case of a ST-LINK V2 a:   
 ```sudo st-info --probe```  
or   
```sudo st-flash --reset write firmware.bin 0x8000000``` should work.
- As usb devices cannot be shared, it needs to be released before using on another machine. On WSL2, verify status with ```usbip port``` and   
``` sudo usbip detach -p 00``` to detach.

### Using usb in Docker
Docker should be setup as ```Use the WSL 2 based engine```. In that case, all usb from WSL2 will be relayed into each docker container. To access the usb a container should be run with ```--privileged``` flag. No need for any other software or setup.


### Using usbip in VSCode, with devcontainer
    


### Useful links
- [Installing on WSL2/Debian](https://superuser.com/questions/1686414/e-unable-to-locate-package-linux-tools-5-4-0-77-generic-on-wsl-debian-11)
- [usbipd on github](https://github.com/dorssel/usbipd-win)
- [st-flash doc and examples](https://www.mankier.com/1/st-flash)

Commit message:

multiple project structure in one repo

README.md, after:

# Bare metal blink on STM32 blue pill, VSCode and Dockerized

&nbsp;
## Prerequisites
- STM32F103 dev board (blue pill), and a ST-LINK V2 usb programmer. ST-LINK V2 can be a cheap clone from Amazon or ebay ($ 3). Make sure the ST-LINK driver is installed, open device manager to check. Flashing over a serial link is also possible, but not recommended because there is no debugging over a serial link.
- Assuming Windows 10 with Docker desktop installed and WSL2 enabled. A Mac or Linux machine will work also, but this repo focusses on Windows 10 host. As WSL2 distro, Debian is used.
- VSCode is used as IDE, with tasks configured in .vscode/tasks.json. 
If you want keybindings, install them as a user setting (File->Preferences->Keyboard shortcuts select json file)

&nbsp;
## Checking the dev environment
To check the arm dev environment, open a terminal into the ```.devcontainer``` folder. Rebuild the arm dev environment with:  
 ```docker build -t armdev . ```   
and run it in the background by:   
```docker run -it -d --privileged armdev```  
Check if container is running by ```docker ps```, and terminal into it by using the container id:   
```docker exec -it <id> bash```

&nbsp;
## USB in WSL and Docker
We need to flash devices from the docker container, but USB on the windows machine is not passed to WSL2 or docker containers. Also Windows hyper V does not support this. Virtualbox and VMWare player claim to forward USB devices, but I found this very cumbersome and tedious.

&nbsp;
### Preparations and installing 

&nbsp;
#### Windows
- install WSL2 with your favorite distro, in this document I will use Debian.
- install ```usbipd``` from [github](https://github.com/dorssel/usbipd-win/releases/tag/v1.3.0), this is the deamon that manages sharing on the windows side.
- Prepare a usb device for sharing from windows host. Use ```usbipd list``` to view usb sharing. After disconnecting/connecting a usb device, its state is persisted, in contrast to what the docs say. For binding/unbinding usb devices, you a elevated prompt on Windows host. Binding example:   
```usbipd bind -b 2-2```
- There is a shortcut to share a device to WSL2, so you do not have to mess around with hostnames and networks: ```usbipd wsl attach --busid=<BUSID>```. This works as long as a WSL2 session is active. ```lsusb``` on WSL2 side should now show the USB device. After removing/inserting the device, it should be attached again.

&nbsp;
#### WSL 2
- Make sure that the WSL 2 kernel is version > 5.10.60.1 To check open WSL2 terminal and ```uname -a``` If the version is lower, run from elevated prompt on Windows: ```wsl --update```
- install usbip hwdata usbutils on WSL2, if you want to use USB in WSL2. Optional stlink-tools if you want to flash STM32 devices from WSL2.   
```sudo apt install usbip hwdata usbutils stlink-tools```
- WSL comes with its own mDNS, so the Windows host can be reached as ```ping "$(hostname).local"``` There is a firewall in place, so ping does not work, but the name resolves!
- To see a list of shared devices: ```usbip list --remote="$(hostname).local"``` The resolved ip will also work, of course.
- ```sudo usbip attach --remote="$(hostname).local" --busid=<id>``` will attach a device, ```lsusb``` should now show it.   
In case of a ST-LINK V2 a:   
 ```sudo st-info --probe```  
or   
```sudo st-flash --reset write firmware.bin 0x8000000``` should work.
- As usb devices cannot be shared, it needs to be released before using on another machine. On WSL2, verify status with ```usbip port``` and   
``` sudo usbip detach -p 00``` to detach.

&nbsp;
### Using usb in Docker
Docker should be setup as ```Use the WSL 2 based engine```. In that case, all usb from WSL2 will be relayed into each docker container. To access the usb a container should be run with ```--privileged``` flag. No need for any other software or setup.

&nbsp;
### Using usbip in VSCode, with devcontainer
The ```.devcontainer``` folder has al the files needed to start a Dockerized devellopment enviroment.

&nbsp;
## Switching projects
As this repo contains multiple examples on the same board, just edit the Makefile to switch to another project.

&nbsp;
## Useful links
- [Installing on WSL2/Debian](https://superuser.com/questions/1686414/e-unable-to-locate-package-linux-tools-5-4-0-77-generic-on-wsl-debian-11)
- [usbipd on github](https://github.com/dorssel/usbipd-win)
- [st-flash doc and examples](https://www.mankier.com/1/st-flash)
